docs/compiler/compiler-guide.md, before:

---
title: Compiler Guide
sidebar_position: 3
id: compiler_guide
license: |
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
  contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
  this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
  The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
  (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
  the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
---

This guide covers installation, usage, and integration of the Fory IDL compiler.

## Installation

### From Source

```bash
cd compiler
pip install -e .
```

### Verify Installation

```bash
foryc --help
```

## Command Line Interface

### Basic Usage

```bash
foryc [OPTIONS] FILES...
```

```bash
foryc --scan-generated [OPTIONS]
```

### Options

Compile options:

| Option                                | Description                                           | Default       |
| ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- | ------------- |
| `--lang`                              | Comma-separated target languages                      | `all`         |
| `--output`, `-o`                      | Output directory                                      | `./generated` |
| `--package`                           | Override package name from Fory IDL file              | (from file)   |
| `-I`, `--proto_path`, `--import_path` | Add directory to import search path (can be repeated) | (none)        |
| `--java_out=DST_DIR`                  | Generate Java code in DST_DIR                         | (none)        |
| `--python_out=DST_DIR`                | Generate Python code in DST_DIR                       | (none)        |
| `--cpp_out=DST_DIR`                   | Generate C++ code in DST_DIR                          | (none)        |
| `--go_out=DST_DIR`                    | Generate Go code in DST_DIR                           | (none)        |
| `--rust_out=DST_DIR`                  | Generate Rust code in DST_DIR                         | (none)        |
| `--csharp_out=DST_DIR`                | Generate C# code in DST_DIR                           | (none)        |
| `--swift_out=DST_DIR`                 | Generate Swift code in DST_DIR                        | (none)        |
| `--go_nested_type_style`              | Go nested type naming: `camelcase` or `underscore`    | `underscore`  |
| `--emit-fdl`                          | Emit translated FDL (for non-FDL inputs)              | `false`       |
| `--emit-fdl-path`                     | Write translated FDL to this path (file or directory) | (stdout)      |

Scan options (with `--scan-generated`):

| Option       | Description                    | Default |
| ------------ | ------------------------------ | ------- |
| `--root`     | Root directory to scan         | `.`     |
| `--relative` | Print paths relative to root   | `false` |
| `--delete`   | Delete matched generated files | `false` |
| `--dry-run`  | Scan/print only, do not delete | `false` |

### Scan Generated Files

Use `--scan-generated` to find files produced by `foryc`. The scanner walks
the tree recursively, skips `build/`, `target/`, and hidden directories, and prints
each generated file as it is found.

```bash
# Scan current directory
foryc --scan-generated

# Scan a specific root
foryc --scan-generated --root ./src

# Print paths relative to the scan root
foryc --scan-generated --root ./src --relative

# Delete scanned generated files
foryc --scan-generated --root ./src --delete

# Dry-run (scan and print only)
foryc --scan-generated --root ./src --dry-run
```

### Examples

**Compile for all languages:**

```bash
foryc schema.fdl
```

**Compile for specific languages:**

```bash
foryc schema.fdl --lang java,python,csharp,swift
```

**Specify output directory:**

```bash
foryc schema.fdl --output ./src/generated
```

**Override package name:**

```bash
foryc schema.fdl --package com.myapp.models
```

**Compile multiple files:**

```bash
foryc user.fdl order.fdl product.fdl --output ./generated
```

**Use import search paths:**

```bash
# Add a single import path
foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/common

# Add multiple import paths (repeated option)
foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/common -I libs/types

# Add multiple import paths (comma-separated)
foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/common,libs/types,third_party/

# Using --proto_path (protoc-compatible alias)
foryc src/main.fdl --proto_path=libs/common

# Mix all styles
foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/common,libs/types --proto_path third_party/
```

**Language-specific output directories (protoc-style):**

```bash
# Generate only Java code to a specific directory
foryc schema.fdl --java_out=./src/main/java

# Generate multiple languages to different directories
foryc schema.fdl --java_out=./java/gen --python_out=./python/src --go_out=./go/gen --csharp_out=./csharp/gen --swift_out=./swift/gen

# Combine with import paths
foryc schema.fdl --java_out=./gen/java -I proto/ -I common/
```

When using `--{lang}_out` options:

- Only the specified languages are generated (not all languages)
- The compiler writes under the specified directory (language-specific generators may still create package/module subdirectories)
- This is compatible with protoc-style workflows

**Inspect translated Fory IDL from proto/fbs input:**

```bash
# Print translated Fory IDL to stdout
foryc schema.proto --emit-fdl

# Write translated Fory IDL to a directory
foryc schema.fbs --emit-fdl --emit-fdl-path ./translated
```

## Import Path Resolution

When compiling Fory IDL files with imports, the compiler searches for imported files in this order:

1. **Relative to the importing file (default)** - The directory containing the file with the import statement is always searched first, automatically. No `-I` flag needed for same-directory imports.
2. **Each `-I` path in order** - Additional search paths specified on the command line

**Same-directory imports work automatically:**

```protobuf
// main.fdl
import "common.fdl";  // Found if common.fdl is in the same directory
```

```bash
# No -I needed for same-directory imports
foryc main.fdl
```

**Example project structure:**

```
project/
├── src/
│   └── main.fdl          # import "common.fdl";
└── libs/
    └── common.fdl
```

**Without `-I` (fails):**

```bash
$ foryc src/main.fdl
Import error: Import not found: common.fdl
  Searched in: /project/src
```

**With `-I` (succeeds):**

```bash
$ foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/
Compiling src/main.fdl...
  Resolved 1 import(s)
```

## Supported Languages

| Language | Flag     | Output Extension | Description                  |
| -------- | -------- | ---------------- | ---------------------------- |
| Java     | `java`   | `.java`          | POJOs with Fory annotations  |
| Python   | `python` | `.py`            | Dataclasses with type hints  |
| Go       | `go`     | `.go`            | Structs with struct tags     |
| Rust     | `rust`   | `.rs`            | Structs with derive macros   |
| C++      | `cpp`    | `.h`             | Structs with FORY macros     |
| C#       | `csharp` | `.cs`            | Classes with Fory attributes |
| Swift    | `swift`  | `.swift`         | `@ForyObject` Swift models   |

## Output Structure

### Java

```
generated/
└── java/
    └── com/
        └── example/
            ├── User.java
            ├── Order.java
            ├── Status.java
            └── ExampleForyRegistration.java
```

- One file per type (enum or message)
- Package structure matches Fory IDL package
- Registration helper class generated

### Python

```
generated/
└── python/
    └── example.py
```

- Single module with all types
- Module name derived from package
- Registration function included

### Go

```
generated/
└── go/
    └── example/
        └── example.go
```

- Single file with all types
- Directory and package name are derived from `go_package` or the Fory IDL package
- Registration function included

### Rust

```
generated/
└── rust/
    └── example.rs
```

- Single module with all types
- Module name derived from package
- Registration function included

### C++

```
generated/
└── cpp/
    └── example.h
```

- Single header file
- Namespace matches package (dots to `::`)
- Header guards and forward declarations

### C\#

```
generated/
└── csharp/
    └── example/
        └── example.cs
```

- Single `.cs` file per schema
- Namespace uses `csharp_namespace` (if set) or Fory IDL package
- Includes registration helper and `ToBytes`/`FromBytes` methods
- Imported schemas are registered transitively (for example `root.idl` importing
  `addressbook.fdl` and `tree.fdl`)

### Swift

```
generated/
└── swift/
    └── addressbook/
        └── addressbook.swift
```

- Single `.swift` file per schema
- Package segments are mapped to nested Swift enums (for example `addressbook.*` -> `Addressbook.*`)
- Generated messages/unions/enums use `@ForyObject` and `@ForyField(id: ...)`
- Union types are generated as tagged enums with associated payload values
- Each schema includes `ForyRegistration` and `toBytes`/`fromBytes` helpers
- Imported schemas are registered transitively by generated registration helpers

### C# IDL Matrix Verification

Run the end-to-end C# IDL matrix (FDL/IDL/Proto/FBS generation plus roundtrip tests):

```bash
cd integration_tests/idl_tests
./run_csharp_tests.sh
```

This runner executes schema-consistent and compatible roundtrips across:

- `addressbook`, `auto_id`, `complex_pb` primitives
- `collection` and union/list variants
- `optional_types`
- `any_example` (`.fdl`) and `any_example` (`.proto`)
- `tree` and `graph` reference-tracking cases
- `monster.fbs` and `complex_fbs.fbs`
- `root.idl` cross-package import coverage
- evolving schema compatibility cases

### Swift IDL Matrix Verification

Run the end-to-end Swift IDL matrix (FDL/IDL/Proto/FBS generation plus roundtrip tests):

```bash
cd integration_tests/idl_tests
./run_swift_tests.sh
```

This runs:

- local Swift IDL roundtrip tests in both compatible and schema-consistent modes
- Java-driven peer roundtrip validation with `IDL_PEER_LANG=swift`

The script also sets `DATA_FILE*` variables so file-based roundtrip paths are exercised.

## Build Integration

### Maven (Java)

Add to your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<build>
  <plugins>
    <plugin>
      <groupId>org.codehaus.mojo</groupId>
      <artifactId>exec-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <version>3.1.0</version>
      <executions>
        <execution>
          <id>generate-fory-types</id>
          <phase>generate-sources</phase>
          <goals>
            <goal>exec</goal>
          </goals>
          <configuration>
            <executable>foryc</executable>
            <arguments>
              <argument>${project.basedir}/src/main/fdl/schema.fdl</argument>
              <argument>--java_out</argument>
              <argument>${project.build.directory}/generated-sources/fory</argument>
            </arguments>
          </configuration>
        </execution>
      </executions>
    </plugin>
  </plugins>
</build>
```

Add generated sources:

```xml
<build>
  <plugins>
    <plugin>
      <groupId>org.codehaus.mojo</groupId>
      <artifactId>build-helper-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <version>3.4.0</version>
      <executions>
        <execution>
          <phase>generate-sources</phase>
          <goals>
            <goal>add-source</goal>
          </goals>
          <configuration>
            <sources>
              <source>${project.build.directory}/generated-sources/fory</source>
            </sources>
          </configuration>
        </execution>
      </executions>
    </plugin>
  </plugins>
</build>
```

### Gradle (Java/Kotlin)

Add to `build.gradle`:

```groovy
task generateForyTypes(type: Exec) {
    commandLine 'foryc',
        "${projectDir}/src/main/fdl/schema.fdl",
        '--java_out', "${buildDir}/generated/sources/fory"
}

compileJava.dependsOn generateForyTypes

sourceSets {
    main {
        java {
            srcDir "${buildDir}/generated/sources/fory"
        }
    }
}
```

### Python (setuptools)

Add to `setup.py` or `pyproject.toml`:

```python
# setup.py
from setuptools import setup
from setuptools.command.build_py import build_py
import subprocess

class BuildWithForyIdl(build_py):
    def run(self):
        subprocess.run([
            'foryc',
            'schema.fdl',
            '--python_out', 'src/generated'
        ], check=True)
        super().run()

setup(
    cmdclass={'build_py': BuildWithForyIdl},
    # ...
)
```

### Go (go generate)

Add to your Go file:

```go
//go:generate foryc ../schema.fdl --lang go --output .
package models
```

Run:

```bash
go generate ./...
```

### Rust (build.rs)

Add to `build.rs`:

```rust
use std::process::Command;

fn main() {
    println!("cargo:rerun-if-changed=schema.fdl");

    let status = Command::new("foryc")
        .args(&["schema.fdl", "--rust_out", "src/generated"])
        .status()
        .expect("Failed to run foryc");

    if !status.success() {
        panic!("Fory IDL compilation failed");
    }
}
```

### CMake (C++)

Add to `CMakeLists.txt`:

```cmake
find_program(FORY_COMPILER foryc)

add_custom_command(
    OUTPUT ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/generated/example.h
    COMMAND ${FORY_COMPILER}
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/schema.fdl
        --cpp_out ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/generated
    DEPENDS ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/schema.fdl
    COMMENT "Generating Fory IDL types"
)

add_custom_target(generate_fory_idl DEPENDS ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/generated/example.h)

add_library(mylib ...)
add_dependencies(mylib generate_fory_idl)
target_include_directories(mylib PRIVATE ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/generated)
```

### Bazel

Create a rule in `BUILD`:

```python
genrule(
    name = "generate_fdl",
    srcs = ["schema.fdl"],
    outs = ["generated/example.h"],
    cmd = "$(location //:fory_compiler) $(SRCS) --cpp_out $(RULEDIR)/generated",
    tools = ["//:fory_compiler"],
)

cc_library(
    name = "models",
    hdrs = [":generate_fdl"],
    # ...
)
```

## Error Handling

### Syntax Errors

```
Error: Line 5, Column 12: Expected ';' after field declaration
```

Fix: Check the indicated line for missing semicolons or syntax issues.

### Duplicate Type Names

```
Error: Duplicate type name: User
```

Fix: Ensure each enum and message has a unique name within the file.

### Duplicate Type IDs

```
Error: Duplicate type ID 100: User and Order
```

Fix: Assign unique type IDs to each type.

### Unknown Type References

```
Error: Unknown type 'Address' in Customer.address
```

Fix: Define the referenced type before using it, or check for typos.

### Duplicate Field Numbers

```
Error: Duplicate field number 1 in User: name and id
```

Fix: Assign unique field numbers within each message.

## Best Practices

### Project Structure

```
project/
├── fdl/
│   ├── common.fdl       # Shared types
│   ├── user.fdl         # User domain
│   └── order.fdl        # Order domain
├── src/
│   └── generated/       # Generated code (git-ignored)
└── build.gradle
```

### Version Control

- **Track**: Fory IDL schema files
- **Ignore**: Generated code (can be regenerated)

Add to `.gitignore`:

```
# Generated Fory IDL code
src/generated/
generated/
```

### CI/CD Integration

Always regenerate during builds:

```yaml
# GitHub Actions example
steps:
  - name: Install Fory IDL Compiler
    run: pip install ./compiler

  - name: Generate Types
    run: foryc fdl/*.fdl --output src/generated

  - name: Build
    run: ./gradlew build
```

### Schema Evolution

When modifying schemas:

1. **Never reuse field numbers** - Mark as reserved instead
2. **Never change type IDs** - They're part of the binary format
3. **Add new fields** - Use new field numbers
4. **Use `optional`** - For backward compatibility

```protobuf
message User [id=100] {
    string id = 1;
    string name = 2;
    // Field 3 was removed, don't reuse
    optional string email = 4;  // New field
}
```

## Troubleshooting

### Command Not Found

```
foryc: command not found
```

**Solution:** Ensure the compiler is installed and in your PATH:

```bash
pip install -e ./compiler
# Or add to PATH
export PATH=$PATH:~/.local/bin
```

### Permission Denied

```
Permission denied: ./generated
```

**Solution:** Ensure write permissions on the output directory:

```bash
chmod -R u+w ./generated
```

### Import Errors in Generated Code

**Java:** Ensure Fory dependency is in your project:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.fory</groupId>
  <artifactId>fory-core</artifactId>
  <version>${fory.version}</version>
</dependency>
```

**Python:** Ensure pyfory is installed:

```bash
pip install pyfory
```

**Go:** Ensure fory module is available:

```bash
go get github.com/apache/fory/go/fory
```

**Rust:** Ensure fory crate is in `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
fory = "x.y.z"
```

**C++:** Ensure Fory headers are in include path.

Commit message:

docs(compiler): document go/swift style options and proto extensions

docs/compiler/compiler-guide.md, after:

---
title: Compiler Guide
sidebar_position: 3
id: compiler_guide
license: |
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
  contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
  this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
  The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
  (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
  the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
---

This guide covers installation, usage, and integration of the Fory IDL compiler.

## Installation

### From Source

```bash
cd compiler
pip install -e .
```

### Verify Installation

```bash
foryc --help
```

## Command Line Interface

### Basic Usage

```bash
foryc [OPTIONS] FILES...
```

```bash
foryc --scan-generated [OPTIONS]
```

### Options

Compile options:

| Option                                | Description                                           | Default       |
| ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- | ------------- |
| `--lang`                              | Comma-separated target languages                      | `all`         |
| `--output`, `-o`                      | Output directory                                      | `./generated` |
| `--package`                           | Override package name from Fory IDL file              | (from file)   |
| `-I`, `--proto_path`, `--import_path` | Add directory to import search path (can be repeated) | (none)        |
| `--java_out=DST_DIR`                  | Generate Java code in DST_DIR                         | (none)        |
| `--python_out=DST_DIR`                | Generate Python code in DST_DIR                       | (none)        |
| `--cpp_out=DST_DIR`                   | Generate C++ code in DST_DIR                          | (none)        |
| `--go_out=DST_DIR`                    | Generate Go code in DST_DIR                           | (none)        |
| `--rust_out=DST_DIR`                  | Generate Rust code in DST_DIR                         | (none)        |
| `--csharp_out=DST_DIR`                | Generate C# code in DST_DIR                           | (none)        |
| `--swift_out=DST_DIR`                 | Generate Swift code in DST_DIR                        | (none)        |
| `--go_nested_type_style`              | Go nested type naming: `camelcase` or `underscore`    | `underscore`  |
| `--swift_namespace_style`             | Swift namespace style: `enum` or `flatten`            | `enum`        |
| `--emit-fdl`                          | Emit translated FDL (for non-FDL inputs)              | `false`       |
| `--emit-fdl-path`                     | Write translated FDL to this path (file or directory) | (stdout)      |

For both `go_nested_type_style` and `swift_namespace_style`, schema-level file options are supported (`option ... = ...;`) and the CLI flag overrides the schema option when both are present.

Scan options (with `--scan-generated`):

| Option       | Description                    | Default |
| ------------ | ------------------------------ | ------- |
| `--root`     | Root directory to scan         | `.`     |
| `--relative` | Print paths relative to root   | `false` |
| `--delete`   | Delete matched generated files | `false` |
| `--dry-run`  | Scan/print only, do not delete | `false` |

### Scan Generated Files

Use `--scan-generated` to find files produced by `foryc`. The scanner walks
the tree recursively, skips `build/`, `target/`, and hidden directories, and prints
each generated file as it is found.

```bash
# Scan current directory
foryc --scan-generated

# Scan a specific root
foryc --scan-generated --root ./src

# Print paths relative to the scan root
foryc --scan-generated --root ./src --relative

# Delete scanned generated files
foryc --scan-generated --root ./src --delete

# Dry-run (scan and print only)
foryc --scan-generated --root ./src --dry-run
```

### Examples

**Compile for all languages:**

```bash
foryc schema.fdl
```

**Compile for specific languages:**

```bash
foryc schema.fdl --lang java,python,csharp,swift
```

**Specify output directory:**

```bash
foryc schema.fdl --output ./src/generated
```

**Override package name:**

```bash
foryc schema.fdl --package com.myapp.models
```

**Compile multiple files:**

```bash
foryc user.fdl order.fdl product.fdl --output ./generated
```

**Use import search paths:**

```bash
# Add a single import path
foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/common

# Add multiple import paths (repeated option)
foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/common -I libs/types

# Add multiple import paths (comma-separated)
foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/common,libs/types,third_party/

# Using --proto_path (protoc-compatible alias)
foryc src/main.fdl --proto_path=libs/common

# Mix all styles
foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/common,libs/types --proto_path third_party/
```

**Language-specific output directories (protoc-style):**

```bash
# Generate only Java code to a specific directory
foryc schema.fdl --java_out=./src/main/java

# Generate multiple languages to different directories
foryc schema.fdl --java_out=./java/gen --python_out=./python/src --go_out=./go/gen --csharp_out=./csharp/gen --swift_out=./swift/gen

# Combine with import paths
foryc schema.fdl --java_out=./gen/java -I proto/ -I common/
```

When using `--{lang}_out` options:

- Only the specified languages are generated (not all languages)
- The compiler writes under the specified directory (language-specific generators may still create package/module subdirectories)
- This is compatible with protoc-style workflows

**Inspect translated Fory IDL from proto/fbs input:**

```bash
# Print translated Fory IDL to stdout
foryc schema.proto --emit-fdl

# Write translated Fory IDL to a directory
foryc schema.fbs --emit-fdl --emit-fdl-path ./translated
```

## Import Path Resolution

When compiling Fory IDL files with imports, the compiler searches for imported files in this order:

1. **Relative to the importing file (default)** - The directory containing the file with the import statement is always searched first, automatically. No `-I` flag needed for same-directory imports.
2. **Each `-I` path in order** - Additional search paths specified on the command line

**Same-directory imports work automatically:**

```protobuf
// main.fdl
import "common.fdl";  // Found if common.fdl is in the same directory
```

```bash
# No -I needed for same-directory imports
foryc main.fdl
```

**Example project structure:**

```
project/
├── src/
│   └── main.fdl          # import "common.fdl";
└── libs/
    └── common.fdl
```

**Without `-I` (fails):**

```bash
$ foryc src/main.fdl
Import error: Import not found: common.fdl
  Searched in: /project/src
```

**With `-I` (succeeds):**

```bash
$ foryc src/main.fdl -I libs/
Compiling src/main.fdl...
  Resolved 1 import(s)
```

## Supported Languages

| Language | Flag     | Output Extension | Description                  |
| -------- | -------- | ---------------- | ---------------------------- |
| Java     | `java`   | `.java`          | POJOs with Fory annotations  |
| Python   | `python` | `.py`            | Dataclasses with type hints  |
| Go       | `go`     | `.go`            | Structs with struct tags     |
| Rust     | `rust`   | `.rs`            | Structs with derive macros   |
| C++      | `cpp`    | `.h`             | Structs with FORY macros     |
| C#       | `csharp` | `.cs`            | Classes with Fory attributes |
| Swift    | `swift`  | `.swift`         | `@ForyObject` Swift models   |

## Output Structure

### Java

```
generated/
└── java/
    └── com/
        └── example/
            ├── User.java
            ├── Order.java
            ├── Status.java
            └── ExampleForyRegistration.java
```

- One file per type (enum or message)
- Package structure matches Fory IDL package
- Registration helper class generated

### Python

```
generated/
└── python/
    └── example.py
```

- Single module with all types
- Module name derived from package
- Registration function included

### Go

```
generated/
└── go/
    └── example/
        └── example.go
```

- Single file with all types
- Directory and package name are derived from `go_package` or the Fory IDL package
- Registration function included

### Rust

```
generated/
└── rust/
    └── example.rs
```

- Single module with all types
- Module name derived from package
- Registration function included

### C++

```
generated/
└── cpp/
    └── example.h
```

- Single header file
- Namespace matches package (dots to `::`)
- Header guards and forward declarations

### C\#

```
generated/
└── csharp/
    └── example/
        └── example.cs
```

- Single `.cs` file per schema
- Namespace uses `csharp_namespace` (if set) or Fory IDL package
- Includes registration helper and `ToBytes`/`FromBytes` methods
- Imported schemas are registered transitively (for example `root.idl` importing
  `addressbook.fdl` and `tree.fdl`)

### Swift

```
generated/
└── swift/
    └── addressbook/
        └── addressbook.swift
```

- Single `.swift` file per schema
- Package segments are mapped to nested Swift enums (for example `addressbook.*` -> `Addressbook.*`)
- Generated messages/unions/enums use `@ForyObject` and `@ForyField(id: ...)`
- Union types are generated as tagged enums with associated payload values
- Each schema includes `ForyRegistration` and `toBytes`/`fromBytes` helpers
- Imported schemas are registered transitively by generated registration helpers

### C# IDL Matrix Verification

Run the end-to-end C# IDL matrix (FDL/IDL/Proto/FBS generation plus roundtrip tests):

```bash
cd integration_tests/idl_tests
./run_csharp_tests.sh
```

This runner executes schema-consistent and compatible roundtrips across:

- `addressbook`, `auto_id`, `complex_pb` primitives
- `collection` and union/list variants
- `optional_types`
- `any_example` (`.fdl`) and `any_example` (`.proto`)
- `tree` and `graph` reference-tracking cases
- `monster.fbs` and `complex_fbs.fbs`
- `root.idl` cross-package import coverage
- evolving schema compatibility cases

### Swift IDL Matrix Verification

Run the end-to-end Swift IDL matrix (FDL/IDL/Proto/FBS generation plus roundtrip tests):

```bash
cd integration_tests/idl_tests
./run_swift_tests.sh
```

This runs:

- local Swift IDL roundtrip tests in both compatible and schema-consistent modes
- Java-driven peer roundtrip validation with `IDL_PEER_LANG=swift`

The script also sets `DATA_FILE*` variables so file-based roundtrip paths are exercised.

## Build Integration

### Maven (Java)

Add to your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<build>
  <plugins>
    <plugin>
      <groupId>org.codehaus.mojo</groupId>
      <artifactId>exec-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <version>3.1.0</version>
      <executions>
        <execution>
          <id>generate-fory-types</id>
          <phase>generate-sources</phase>
          <goals>
            <goal>exec</goal>
          </goals>
          <configuration>
            <executable>foryc</executable>
            <arguments>
              <argument>${project.basedir}/src/main/fdl/schema.fdl</argument>
              <argument>--java_out</argument>
              <argument>${project.build.directory}/generated-sources/fory</argument>
            </arguments>
          </configuration>
        </execution>
      </executions>
    </plugin>
  </plugins>
</build>
```

Add generated sources:

```xml
<build>
  <plugins>
    <plugin>
      <groupId>org.codehaus.mojo</groupId>
      <artifactId>build-helper-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <version>3.4.0</version>
      <executions>
        <execution>
          <phase>generate-sources</phase>
          <goals>
            <goal>add-source</goal>
          </goals>
          <configuration>
            <sources>
              <source>${project.build.directory}/generated-sources/fory</source>
            </sources>
          </configuration>
        </execution>
      </executions>
    </plugin>
  </plugins>
</build>
```

### Gradle (Java/Kotlin)

Add to `build.gradle`:

```groovy
task generateForyTypes(type: Exec) {
    commandLine 'foryc',
        "${projectDir}/src/main/fdl/schema.fdl",
        '--java_out', "${buildDir}/generated/sources/fory"
}

compileJava.dependsOn generateForyTypes

sourceSets {
    main {
        java {
            srcDir "${buildDir}/generated/sources/fory"
        }
    }
}
```

### Python (setuptools)

Add to `setup.py` or `pyproject.toml`:

```python
# setup.py
from setuptools import setup
from setuptools.command.build_py import build_py
import subprocess

class BuildWithForyIdl(build_py):
    def run(self):
        subprocess.run([
            'foryc',
            'schema.fdl',
            '--python_out', 'src/generated'
        ], check=True)
        super().run()

setup(
    cmdclass={'build_py': BuildWithForyIdl},
    # ...
)
```

### Go (go generate)

Add to your Go file:

```go
//go:generate foryc ../schema.fdl --lang go --output .
package models
```

Run:

```bash
go generate ./...
```

### Rust (build.rs)

Add to `build.rs`:

```rust
use std::process::Command;

fn main() {
    println!("cargo:rerun-if-changed=schema.fdl");

    let status = Command::new("foryc")
        .args(&["schema.fdl", "--rust_out", "src/generated"])
        .status()
        .expect("Failed to run foryc");

    if !status.success() {
        panic!("Fory IDL compilation failed");
    }
}
```

### CMake (C++)

Add to `CMakeLists.txt`:

```cmake
find_program(FORY_COMPILER foryc)

add_custom_command(
    OUTPUT ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/generated/example.h
    COMMAND ${FORY_COMPILER}
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/schema.fdl
        --cpp_out ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/generated
    DEPENDS ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/schema.fdl
    COMMENT "Generating Fory IDL types"
)

add_custom_target(generate_fory_idl DEPENDS ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/generated/example.h)

add_library(mylib ...)
add_dependencies(mylib generate_fory_idl)
target_include_directories(mylib PRIVATE ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/generated)
```

### Bazel

Create a rule in `BUILD`:

```python
genrule(
    name = "generate_fdl",
    srcs = ["schema.fdl"],
    outs = ["generated/example.h"],
    cmd = "$(location //:fory_compiler) $(SRCS) --cpp_out $(RULEDIR)/generated",
    tools = ["//:fory_compiler"],
)

cc_library(
    name = "models",
    hdrs = [":generate_fdl"],
    # ...
)
```

## Error Handling

### Syntax Errors

```
Error: Line 5, Column 12: Expected ';' after field declaration
```

Fix: Check the indicated line for missing semicolons or syntax issues.

### Duplicate Type Names

```
Error: Duplicate type name: User
```

Fix: Ensure each enum and message has a unique name within the file.

### Duplicate Type IDs

```
Error: Duplicate type ID 100: User and Order
```

Fix: Assign unique type IDs to each type.

### Unknown Type References

```
Error: Unknown type 'Address' in Customer.address
```

Fix: Define the referenced type before using it, or check for typos.

### Duplicate Field Numbers

```
Error: Duplicate field number 1 in User: name and id
```

Fix: Assign unique field numbers within each message.

## Best Practices

### Project Structure

```
project/
├── fdl/
│   ├── common.fdl       # Shared types
│   ├── user.fdl         # User domain
│   └── order.fdl        # Order domain
├── src/
│   └── generated/       # Generated code (git-ignored)
└── build.gradle
```

### Version Control

- **Track**: Fory IDL schema files
- **Ignore**: Generated code (can be regenerated)

Add to `.gitignore`:

```
# Generated Fory IDL code
src/generated/
generated/
```

### CI/CD Integration

Always regenerate during builds:

```yaml
# GitHub Actions example
steps:
  - name: Install Fory IDL Compiler
    run: pip install ./compiler

  - name: Generate Types
    run: foryc fdl/*.fdl --output src/generated

  - name: Build
    run: ./gradlew build
```

### Schema Evolution

When modifying schemas:

1. **Never reuse field numbers** - Mark as reserved instead
2. **Never change type IDs** - They're part of the binary format
3. **Add new fields** - Use new field numbers
4. **Use `optional`** - For backward compatibility

```protobuf
message User [id=100] {
    string id = 1;
    string name = 2;
    // Field 3 was removed, don't reuse
    optional string email = 4;  // New field
}
```

## Troubleshooting

### Command Not Found

```
foryc: command not found
```

**Solution:** Ensure the compiler is installed and in your PATH:

```bash
pip install -e ./compiler
# Or add to PATH
export PATH=$PATH:~/.local/bin
```

### Permission Denied

```
Permission denied: ./generated
```

**Solution:** Ensure write permissions on the output directory:

```bash
chmod -R u+w ./generated
```

### Import Errors in Generated Code

**Java:** Ensure Fory dependency is in your project:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.fory</groupId>
  <artifactId>fory-core</artifactId>
  <version>${fory.version}</version>
</dependency>
```

**Python:** Ensure pyfory is installed:

```bash
pip install pyfory
```

**Go:** Ensure fory module is available:

```bash
go get github.com/apache/fory/go/fory
```

**Rust:** Ensure fory crate is in `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
fory = "x.y.z"
```

**C++:** Ensure Fory headers are in include path.
